---
Measuring Outcomes in HTA
author: Bosiljka Djikanović, MD, MSc, PhD
datetime: 10-11-2022-10:00
---

# The importance 
- The evidence should be credible (RCT)
- HTA deal with the input (cost) and output (consequences)
- Resources are limited and choices must be made
- Full EE includes both costs and outcome and comparisons to the alternatives 
- 5 big types CEA, CUA, CMA, CBA
# Measuring outcomes in physical units  
- mmHg (intermidiete outcome)
- Life years gained (Survival) 
- Size of the tumor
- Number of patients who are disease free after oncological treatment 
# Utility besed outcome 
- There is a value attached to the outcome of health status  (HRQoL)
- Utility referees to the preferences that individuals or the society may have
- HRQoL and QUALY


# Measuring and valuing health outcomes

- QUALY can be decease specific or condition-specific 
- QUALY can be generic measure - EQ5D or SF-36 (most commonly used is SF 36)

# Preference-based and non-preference based outcomes measures

Example: Twins with broken arm. The condition affects them differently when they have different occupation or preferences.

Preferences is umbrella term that describes the concent. 
Its depends whether we ask for choice or slcaling 

- Scale method- all outcomes are defined with certainty (VAS, Rating scale, Ratio scaling)
    - Pre-scored multiple attribute heath status classification system. EQ-5D form from EuroQol Group. 5 groups of questions with 3 possible answers - 243 combinations. The question has been validated with VAS and TTO 
- Choices-based methods - We measure under uncertainly (Standard gamble) - Time trade off (TTO), Paired comparison, Equivalence, Person trade off

## DALY 

- Many developing contrives cannot use the previsions written scores. DALY was invented as a tool to overcome this issues. DALY is generic measure developed by WHO. 
- DALY is based under the method of paired comparison. Is calculated by multiplication of disability weight and years life lost. 

# Valuing health outcomes in monetary units 

- Its assumed that is not ethical. Money are not natural units of health 