---
topic: Ratio, Uncertainty and Sensitivity
author: Silvia Evers, PhD, LLM
datetime: 10-11-2022-11:30
---

# EE
In summary. Usually we choice a social perspective 
step 1: Identifying costs and effects 
step 2: Measuring costs and effects 
step 3: Valuing costs and effects
step 4: Discounting
step 5: Ratio and CE plane
step 6: Uncertainty 

# Ratio
Its used only in CEA and CUA. For CBA and CMA ratio is not needed
C1-C2/E1-E2
C1- Costs of experimental program
C2 - Costs of convectional program 
# ICER
 We use lambda. Lambda is benchmark or willingness to pay for certain ICER. 
NOIR- interval and ratio are cardinal used in ratio. Nominal and ordinal are not 
Primary outcome goes in the ratio !

Ratio should be graphically presented in plane.
# Uncertainty analysis 
If the ICER is negative we are sure in our conclusion. Its either better or worse. 
However when the ICER is positive we need acceptance line - which usually is a threshold. 
There is a lot of uncertainty in our estimates. UA is what would have happened if we change our assumptions 

Types of uncertainty
1. Methodological        ===> Reference case
2. Sampling variation    ===> Bootstraping 
3. Extrapolation         ===> Modeling
4. Generalisability      ===> Sensitivity analysis 

**Sensitivity analysis** - process through which the robustness of an Economical model is assessed by examining the changes in results of the analysis when key variables are varied over specific range. Can be univariate - one parameter or multi-variate when we change multiple outcomes 